Proposal: Unify Log Library for Golang Projects (#24181)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2021-04-21-unify-log-library.md

# Proposal: Unifying Log Library

- Author(s): [Yifan Xu](https://github.com/SabaPing)
- Last updated:  Apr 12, 2021
- Discussion at: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24181
- Tracking issue: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24190

## Motivation or Background

Except for slow query logs, all other logs must satisfy the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).

However, in practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing:

> - There are few logging configuration instructions in the document. We need to enrich document especially the type and the format of logs each component would emit.

Reviewer: How would "Unify Log Library" change this situation?

Author: I have added a new doc task to address this problem. See https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24190#issuecomment-837991412

- The configured logging parameters do not match the runtime logging, e.g. `tidb_stderr` is configured with text format, but the log is in json format.

> - The logs of some components do not meet the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/23d4f9aed68a295b678e8bd909ee8479e3ba0bd1/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md), e.g. `tiflash_cluster_manager`.

Reviewer: The refactoring work cannot make `tiflash_cluster_manager` to follow the unified log format, right?

Author: True. Should I delete this line?

- Duplicate logs, e.g. `pd_stderr` will emit both text and json logs with duplicate content (but with a few subtle differences in timestamps).

## Logging code for each component

### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

As a common logging library in PingCAP, it does the following things:

- Provides the standard config schema.
- Provides a factory method for creating log handlers.
- Hard code the log format according to [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/23d4f9aed68a295b678e8bd909ee8479e3ba0bd1/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).
- Encapsulates the logic of the rolling file.
- Provides global log handler and related methods for package dimension.

### TiDB

Log library dependencies:

![tidb-log-dependency](./imgs/tidb-log-dependency.png)

For historical reasons, TiDB has two third-party logging libraries, `logrus` and `pingcap/log`. `pingcap/log` is a wrapper of `zap`.

Logs of TiDB can be divided into two types, slow query logs and the other logs. 

> As mentioned above, these two types of logs are emitted through two different logging libraries, which results in separate configurations for the two types of logs and requires writing additional configuration conversion code.

Reviewer: These two logs are intentionally to have different formats. Will there be a problem when merging the two separated configuration into one?

Author: I added extra conversion layers. After testing and verifying, it should be fine.

Then, determine whether the configuration has enabled slow query log, and if so, create a log handler specific to slow query.

[Here is the code](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/blob/e79fa8c6b654e5b94e9ed0a1c0f997d6564e95be/util/logutil/log.go#L261).

Regarding where these two handlers are used.

- Some historical legacy code, such as `cmd/importer/parser.go`, which uses the standard logger by `logrus`.
- Slow query log all uses the slow query log handler created by `logrus`, code in `executor/adapter.go`.

#### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

`pingcap/log` is a wrapper around zap, and as mentioned below the two terms are equivalently interchangeable.

Similar to `logrus`, the init method of zap `func InitZapLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error` may initialize two zap handlers.

- The global zap handler, the default log handler for the entire repo, through which the vast majority of logs are emitted.
- Slow query zap handler, which is only initialized and not used.
  
`InitZapLogger`'s logic is very similar to `logrus`' above.

#### gRPC Logger

> I almost forgot that there is a fish in the net, which is not in `util/logutil/log.go`. In `main.go` there is a bunch of grpc logger initialization code.

Reviewer: It is very rare to start as "I ...." in the RFC I think. 

```suggestion
In `main.go` there is a bunch of grpc logger initialization code, which is not in `util/logutil/log.go`. 
```

Log library dependencies:

![pd-log-dependency](./imgs/pd-log-dependency.png)

#### Logrus

The standard logger is then passed down to the etcd (via the `capnslog` proxy), grpc and draft components as the log handler for these packages.

There is only one `logrus` handler inside the entire PD codebase.

Only the etcd, grpc, and draft components use the `logrus` handler.

The initialization of `logrus` locates at `pkg/logutil/log.go`. [Here is the code](https://github.com/tikv/pd/blob/b07be86fb91aef07e8a68258ff6149256ab511f8/pkg/logutil/log.go#L260).

#### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

There is only one zap log handler inside the entire PD codebase, and its initialization is inline `cmd/pd-server/main.go`.

[Here is the code](https://github.com/tikv/pd/blob/b07be86fb91aef07e8a68258ff6149256ab511f8/cmd/pd-server/main.go#L66).

The logic is simple, create a new handler based on the configuration and replace the global handler at the `pingcap/log` package level.

Most of the logging logic in PD will use the global zap handler.

### [pingcap/br](https://github.com/pingcap/br)

> BR is strangely listed here, it is not a necessary component for the tidb cluster to run. It is here just for one reason: tidb depends on BR, which in turn depends on tidb's `util/logutil/log.go`, constituting a circular dependency. 

Reviewer 2: BR is nested in TiDB now. So `it is not a necessary component for the tidb cluster to run.` is not accurate.

> Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component 🙃🙃🙃🙃! This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component. This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.
```

It is necessary to unify those heterogeneous logging libraries.

## Background

Except for slow query logs, all other logs must satisfy the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).

However, in practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing:

- There are few logging configuration instructions in the document. We need to enrich document especially the type and the format of logs each component would emit.
- The configured logging parameters do not match the runtime logging, e.g. `tidb_stderr` is configured with text format, but the log is in json format.
- The logs of some components do not meet the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/23d4f9aed68a295b678e8bd909ee8479e3ba0bd1/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md), e.g. `tiflash_cluster_manager`.
- Duplicate logs, e.g. `pd_stderr` will emit both text and json logs with duplicate content (but with a few subtle differences in timestamps).

## Proposal

There must be something wrong with the engineering of these codes above, and they must be changed. The cost to change them is not small.

> Rationale - for long-term consideration, we should maintain code quality. The speed of output can be sacrificed in time if necessary.

Reviewer 3: > The speed of output can be sacrificed in time if necessary.

I guess you're talking about the 'performance', or more precisely, 'maintainability should be with higher priority over performance when we have to consider the trade-offs'.

Implementation plan:

1. Unify log library for `pingcap/tidb` first. For dependent parts we write dummy code to satisfy.

> 2. Unify log library for `pingcap/br`, remove the dependency on `pingcap/tidb/util/logutil`, and clear dummy code of `pingcap/tidb`.

Reviewer 3: How about the eco-system tools like 'TiCDC' and 'Dumpling'?

Reviewer 4: If it's necessary for TiCDC，I would like to take it.

Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component. This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.

The following code is from `pkg/lightning/log/log.go`, which calls TiDB's `InitLogger` and then `pingcap/log`'s InitLogger.

[Here is the code](https://github.com/pingcap/br/blob/b09611d526a754cee82e6d3b12edf67e4cc885ae/pkg/lightning/log/log.go#L77).

BR also relies on TiDB's slow log, which he initializes in the main function as `SlowQueryLogger`.

BR also calls TiDB's `InitLogger` twice in two places.

BR also created two different zap handlers in two places, one of which is not used.

These problem codes are not listed here.

To refactor TiDB's logging functionality, you must first change BR to remove the dependency on TiDB log, then let TiDB depend on the new version of BR, and finally refactor TiDB's logging.

## Compatibility and Migration Plan

Must ensure that refactoring is compatible with historical logging logic. 

Guaranteed by unit testing.

## Implementation

See meta issue: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24190.

## Testing Plan

Mainly unit testing.

## Open issues (if applicable)

> ## Logging code for each component

Reviewer 3: What is this sector used for?

Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component. This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.

The following code is from `pkg/lightning/log/log.go`, which calls TiDB's `InitLogger` and then `pingcap/log`'s InitLogger.

[Here is the code](https://github.com/pingcap/br/blob/b09611d526a754cee82e6d3b12edf67e4cc885ae/pkg/lightning/log/log.go#L77).

BR also relies on TiDB's slow log, which he initializes in the main function as `SlowQueryLogger`.

BR also calls TiDB's `InitLogger` twice in two places.

BR also created two different zap handlers in two places, one of which is not used.

These problem codes are not listed here.

To refactor TiDB's logging functionality, you must first change BR to remove the dependency on TiDB log, then let TiDB depend on the new version of BR, and finally refactor TiDB's logging.

## Compatibility and Migration Plan

Must ensure that refactoring is compatible with historical logging logic. 

Guaranteed by unit testing.

## Implementation

See meta issue: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24190.

## Testing Plan

Mainly unit testing.

## Open issues (if applicable)

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

> ## Logging code for each component

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Logging code for each component

```

# Proposal: Unifying Log Library

- Author(s): [Yifan Xu](https://github.com/SabaPing)
- Last updated:  Apr 12, 2021
- Discussion at: N/A

## Motivation or Background

> Tidb as a distributed system can be divided into several different components, such as tikv, pd, tidb, tiflash, etc. Each component hits a different log. Except for slow query logs, all other logs must satisfy the unified-log-format rfc standard.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
TiDB as a distributed system can be divided into several different components. Each component hits a different log. Except for slow query logs, all other logs must satisfy [the unified log format standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/8a82e8f3dbba5bc6a239d589330118e3ae48b19e/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).
```

> However, during practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing, as shown in the following four points.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

However, during practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing, as shown in the following four points.
```

> - There are fewer logging configuration instructions in the documentation. The future needs to write clearly what logs each component will hit, and what the format of the logs are.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- There are fewer logging configuration instructions in the document. We need to enrich document especially what logs each component will hit, and what the format of the logs are.
```

- The configured logging parameters do not match the runtime logging, e.g. tidb_stderr is configured with text format but the logging is in json format.
- The logs of some components do not meet the unified-log-format rfc standard, e.g. tiflash_cluster_manager.
- Duplicate logs, e.g. pd_stderr will hit both text and json logs with duplicate content (but with a few subtle differences in timestamps).

## Logging code for each component

> ### Pingcap/log

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### [pingcap/log](http://github.com/pingcap/log)
```

> First, the address: [pingcap/log (github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

As a common logging library for pingcap golang, it does the following things:

- Provides the standard config schema

> - provides a factory method for creating log handlers

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Provides a factory method for creating log handlers
```

> - hard code the log format according to rfcs/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md at master - tikv/rfcs (github.com)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Hard code the log format according to the unified log format.
```

> - encapsulates the logic of the rolling file

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Encapsulates the logic of the rolling file
```

- Provides global log handler and related methods for package dimension

> Pingcap/log has a strong limitation -- it cannot customize the encoder for the text format; this problem has been fixed by the big guys, see [Feature/register zap encoder by 9547 - Pull Request #14 - pingcap/log ( github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pingcap/log used to have a strong limitation, that it was unable to customize the encoder for the text format. This problem has been [fixed by @9547](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).
```

> When PD and TiDB-operator were using pingcap/log, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. This problem is also fixed by a big guys, see [logutil: replace etcd.defaultlogger with pingcap's text encoder by 9547 - Pull Request #3480 - tikv/pd (github.com)](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480), for details. Same big guy as above.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When PD and TiDB-operator were using pingcap/log, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. This problem is also [fixed by @9547](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480).
```

### TiDB

Log library dependencies:

![tidb-log-dependency](./imgs/tidb-log-dependency.png)

> For historical reasons, TiDB has two third-party logging libraries -- logrus and pingcap/log, with pingcap/log wrapping another layer on top of zap.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For historical reasons, TiDB has two third-party logging libraries, logrus and pingcap/log, and pingcap/log is based on the top of zap.
```

> TiDB's logs can be divided by business into two types: slow query logs and remaining other logs. As mentioned above, the two types of logs are typed through two different logging repositories, which results in separate configurations for the two types of logs and requires writing additional configuration conversion code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
TiDB's logs can be divided into two types: slow query logs and other logs. As mentioned above, these two types of logs are typed through two different logging repositories, which results in separate configurations for the two types of logs and requires writing additional configuration conversion code.
```

> TiDB-specific logging logic -- such as logger initialization, logger configuration, etc. -- is written inside util/logutil/log.go. Note this file, which is one of the main culprits of circular dependencies. The following briefly describes the key logic in util/logutil/log.go -- the two init methods and the four log handlers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
TiDB-specific logging logic, such as logger initialization, logger configuration, and so on, is written inside util/logutil/log.go. This file is one of the roots of circular dependencies. 

Details are as below. Briefly, it is about two init methods and the four log handlers.
```

#### Logrus

> The init method of Logrus -- func InitLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error -- may initialize two logrus handlers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The init method of logrus may initialize two logrus handlers.
```

```go
func InitLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error {
   log.SetLevel(stringToLogLevel(cfg.Level))
   log.AddHook(&contextHook{})

   if cfg.Format == "" {
      cfg.Format = DefaultLogFormat
   }
   formatter := stringToLogFormatter(cfg.Format, cfg.DisableTimestamp)
   log.SetFormatter(formatter)

   if len(cfg.File.Filename) != 0 {
      if err := initFileLog(&cfg.File, nil); err != nil {
         return errors.Trace(err)
      }
   }

// The rest is omitted.
```

Then, determine whether the configuration has enabled slow query log, and if so, create a log handler specific to slow query.

```go
if len(cfg.SlowQueryFile) != 0 {
   SlowQueryLogger = log.New()
   tmp := cfg.File
   tmp.Filename = cfg.SlowQueryFile
   if err := initFileLog(&tmp, SlowQueryLogger); err != nil {
      return errors.Trace(err)
   }
   SlowQueryLogger.Formatter = &slowLogFormatter{}
}
```

Regarding where these two handlers are used.

- Some historical legacy code, such as cmd/importer/parser.go, which uses the standard logger by logrus.
- Slow query log all uses the slow query log handler created by logrus, code in executor/adapter.go.

> #### Pingcap/log (Zap)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### pingcap/log(zap)
```

> Pingcap/log is a wrapper around zap, and as mentioned below the two terms are equivalently interchangeable.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pingcap/log is a wrapper of zap, and in our scenario they can be referred interchangeably.
```

> Similar to logrus, the init method of zap -- func InitZapLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error -- may initialize two zap handlers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similar to logrus, the init method of zap, `func InitZapLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error`, may initialize two zap handlers.
```

- The global zap handler, the default log handler for the entire repo, through which the vast majority of logs are typed.
- Slow query zap handler, which is only initialized and not used.

>   InitZapLogger's logic is very similar to logrus' above, so I won't repeat it here.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

The logic inside `InitZapLogger` is similar to that inside logrus.
```

> #### GRPC Logger

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### gRPC Logger
```

> I almost forgot that there is a fish in the net, which is not in util/logutil/log.go. In main.go there is a bunch of grpc logger initialization code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This branch of logging is hardly to be noticed that it is not in util/logutil/log but main.go. There is a bunch of gRPC logger initialization code.
```

```go
if len(os.Getenv("GRPC_DEBUG")) > 0 {
   grpclog.SetLoggerV2(grpclog.NewLoggerV2WithVerbosity(os.Stderr, os.Stderr, os.Stderr, 999))
} else {
   grpclog.SetLoggerV2(grpclog.NewLoggerV2(ioutil.Discard, ioutil.Discard, os.Stderr))
}
```

The NewLoggerV2 method creates a go native logger handler and is only used in grpc.

### PD

PD is similar to tidb in that it also relies on logrus and pingcap/log, but with an additional layer of capnslog as a proxy. log library dependencies.

![pd-log-dependency](./imgs/pd-log-dependency.png)

#### Logrus

> Logrus的初始化代码在pkg/logutil/log.go：

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The initialization code of logrus is under pkg/logutil/log.go:
```

```go

> // cfg是pd启动后得到的配置文件

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
// `cfg` contains configs from pd config file.
```

> // 根据cfg配置logrus

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
// logrus is configured by `cfg`.
```

log.SetLevel(StringToLogLevel(cfg.Level))
log.AddHook(&contextHook{})
if cfg.Format == "" {
   cfg.Format = defaultLogFormat
}
log.SetFormatter(StringToLogFormatter(cfg.Format, cfg.DisableTimestamp))
// etcd log
capnslog.SetFormatter(&redirectFormatter{})
// grpc log
lg := &wrapLogrus{log.StandardLogger()}
grpclog.SetLoggerV2(lg)
// raft log
raft.SetLogger(lg)
if len(cfg.File.Filename) == 0 {
   return
}
err = InitFileLog(&cfg.File)
```

The standard logger is then passed down to the etcd (via the capnslog proxy), grpc and draft components as the log handler for the three package's log handler.

> There is only one logrus handler inside the entire pd.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

There is only one logrus handler inside the whole pd project.
```

> Only the etcd, grupc, and draft components use the logrus handler.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

Only etcd, grpc, and draft component uses the logrus handler.
```

> #### Pingcap/log (Zap)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### pingcap/log(zap)
```

> There is only one zap log handler inside the whole pd.
> The initialization is hidden, in cmd/pd-server/main.go.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There is only one zap log handler inside the whole pd project, and its initialization is inline cmd/pd-server/main.go.
```

```go
// New zap logger
err = cfg.SetupLogger()
if err == nil {
   log.ReplaceGlobals(cfg.GetZapLogger(), cfg.GetZapLogProperties())
} else {
   log.Fatal("initialize logger error", errs.ZapError(err))
}
// Flushing any buffered log entries
defer log.Sync()
```

The logic is simple, create a new handler based on the configuration and replace the global handler at the pingcap/log package level.
Most of the logging logic in PD will use the global zap handler.

> ### Pingcap/br

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### pingcap/br
```

> Br is strangely listed here, he is not a necessary component for the tidb cluster to run. Write him out just for one reason: tidb depends on br, which in turn depends on tidb's util/logutil/log.go, constituting a circular dependency. Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component 🙃🙃🙃🙃! This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Br is strangely listed here, it is not a necessary component for the tidb cluster to run. It is here just for one reason: tidb depends on br, which in turn depends on tidb's util/logutil/log.go, constituting a circular dependency. Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component 🙃🙃🙃🙃! This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.
```

# Proposal: Unifying Log Library

- Author(s): [Yifan Xu](https://github.com/SabaPing)
- Last updated:  Apr 12, 2021

> - Discussion at: N/A

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Discussion at: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24181
- Tracking issue: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24190
```

## Motivation or Background

> Tidb as a distributed system can be divided into several components.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> However, in practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing, as shown in the following four points:

Reviewer 2: How about 'we find that'

However, in practice, it was found that the format of logs is confusing, as shown in the following four points:

> - There are fewer logging configuration instructions in the documentation. We need to enrich document especially what logs each component will emits, and what the format of the logs are.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- There are few logging configuration instructions in the document. We need to enrich document especially the type and the format of logs each component would emit.
```

> - The configured logging parameters do not match the runtime logging, e.g. `tidb_stderr` is configured with text format, but the logging is in json format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The configured logging parameters do not match the runtime logging, e.g. `tidb_stderr` is configured with text format, but the log is in json format.
```

> - The logs of some components do not meet the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md), e.g. `tiflash_cluster_manager`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The logs of some components do not meet the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/23d4f9aed68a295b678e8bd909ee8479e3ba0bd1/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md), e.g. `tiflash_cluster_manager`.
```

- The logs of some components do not meet the [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md), e.g. `tiflash_cluster_manager`.
- Duplicate logs, e.g. `pd_stderr` will emit both text and json logs with duplicate content (but with a few subtle differences in timestamps).

## Logging code for each component

> ### [pingcap/log (github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)
```

As a common logging library for PingCAP golang projects, it does the following things:

- Provides the standard config schema.
- Provides a factory method for creating log handlers.

> - Hard code the log format according to [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Hard code the log format according to [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/23d4f9aed68a295b678e8bd909ee8479e3ba0bd1/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).
```

use a fixed commit hash to prevent affected by master changes

- Hard code the log format according to [unified-log-format RFC standard](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/blob/master/text/2018-12-19-unified-log-format.md).
- Encapsulates the logic of the rolling file.
- Provides global log handler and related methods for package dimension.

> `pingcap/log` has a strong limitation -- it cannot customize the encoder for the text format. This problem has been fixed by a community contributor, see [Feature/register zap encoder by 9547 - Pull Request #14 - pingcap/log ( github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`pingcap/log` has a strong limitation -- it cannot customize the encoder for the text format. This problem has been [fixed by @9547](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).
```

> `pingcap/log` has a strong limitation -- it cannot customize the encoder for the text format. This problem has been fixed by a community contributor, see [Feature/register zap encoder by 9547 - Pull Request #14 - pingcap/log ( github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`pingcap/log` once had a strong limitation, that it couldn't customize the encoder for the text format. This problem had been [fixed by @9547](https://github.com/pingcap/log/pull/14).
```

> When PD and TiDB-operator were using `pingcap/log`, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. Currently, customize encoder [implemented by @9547](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480) and thus we can clear this tech debt.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When PD and TiDB-operator were using `pingcap/log`, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively. But they accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. Currently, customize encoder is implemented by [@9547](http://github.com/9547) in [pd/pull/3480](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480), thus we can clear this tech debt.
```

> When PD and TiDB-operator were using `pingcap/log`, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. Currently, customize encoder [implemented by @9547](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480) and thus we can clear this tech debt.

Reviewer 2: When PD and TiDB-operator using `pingcap/log`,

> When PD and TiDB-operator were using `pingcap/log`, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. This problem is also fixed by the same community contributor, see [logutil: replace etcd.defaultlogger with pingcap's text encoder by 9547 - Pull Request #3480 - tikv/pd (github.com)](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480), for details.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When PD and TiDB-operator were using `pingcap/log`, there was no custom encoder function yet, so they implemented one by themselves respectively, but accidentally wrote out a circular dependency. Currently, customize encoder [implemented by @9547](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/3480) and thus we can clear this tech debt.
```

### TiDB

Log library dependencies:

![tidb-log-dependency](./imgs/tidb-log-dependency.png)

> For historical reasons, TiDB has two third-party logging libraries -- `logrus` and `pingcap/log`, with `pingcap/log` wrapping another layer on top of `zap`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For historical reasons, TiDB has two third-party logging libraries, `logrus` and `pingcap/log`. `pingcap/log` is a wrapper of `zap`.
```

> TiDB's logs can be divided by business into two types: slow query logs and remaining other logs. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Logs of TiDB can be divided into two types, slow query logs and the other logs. 
```

> As mentioned above, the two types of logs are emitted through two different logging libraries, which results in separate configurations for the two types of logs and requires writing additional configuration conversion code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, these two types of logs are emitted through two different logging libraries, which results in separate configurations for the two types of logs and requires writing additional configuration conversion code.
```

> TiDB-specific logging logic -- such as logger initialization, logger configuration, etc. -- is written inside `util/logutil/log.go`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
TiDB-specific logging logic is written inside `util/logutil/log.go`, e.g., logger initialization, logger configuration, and so on.
```

> Note this file, which is one of the main culprits of circular dependencies. The following briefly describes the key logic in `util/logutil/log.go` -- the two init methods, and the four log handlers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

Note this file, which is one of the main culprits of circular dependencies. The following briefly describes the key logic in `util/logutil/log.go`, two init methods and four log handlers.
```

> #### Logrus

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### logrus
```

> The init method of `logrus` -- `func InitLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error` -- may initialize two `logrus` handlers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The init method of `logrus` may initialize two `logrus` handlers.
```

> First, there is necessarily the standard log handler (package level handler) of `logrus`. `initLogger` first initializes the standard logger according to the configuration.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
First, it is necessary to initialize the standard log handler (package level handler). `initLogger` first initializes the standard logger according to the configuration.
```

```go
func InitLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error {
   log.SetLevel(stringToLogLevel(cfg.Level))
   log.AddHook(&contextHook{})

   if cfg.Format == "" {
      cfg.Format = DefaultLogFormat
   }
   formatter := stringToLogFormatter(cfg.Format, cfg.DisableTimestamp)
   log.SetFormatter(formatter)

   if len(cfg.File.Filename) != 0 {
      if err := initFileLog(&cfg.File, nil); err != nil {
         return errors.Trace(err)
      }
   }

// The rest is omitted.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Can we use other methods (maybe a link) to display this code? They make the document longer.

Then, determine whether the configuration has enabled slow query log, and if so, create a log handler specific to slow query.

```go
if len(cfg.SlowQueryFile) != 0 {
   SlowQueryLogger = log.New()
   tmp := cfg.File
   tmp.Filename = cfg.SlowQueryFile
   if err := initFileLog(&tmp, SlowQueryLogger); err != nil {
      return errors.Trace(err)
   }
   SlowQueryLogger.Formatter = &slowLogFormatter{}
}
```

Regarding where these two handlers are used.

- Some historical legacy code, such as `cmd/importer/parser.go`, which uses the standard logger by `logrus`.
- Slow query log all uses the slow query log handler created by `logrus`, code in `executor/adapter.go`.

> #### [pingcap/log (github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)
```

Similar to `logrus`, the init method of zap -- `func InitZapLogger(cfg *LogConfig) error` -- may initialize two zap handlers.

- The global zap handler, the default log handler for the entire repo, through which the vast majority of logs are emitted.
- Slow query zap handler, which is only initialized and not used.
  
`InitZapLogger`'s logic is very similar to `logrus`' above, so I won't repeat it here.

#### GRPC Logger

I almost forgot that there is a fish in the net, which is not in `util/logutil/log.go`. In `main.go` there is a bunch of grpc logger initialization code.

```go
if len(os.Getenv("GRPC_DEBUG")) > 0 {
   grpclog.SetLoggerV2(grpclog.NewLoggerV2WithVerbosity(os.Stderr, os.Stderr, os.Stderr, 999))
} else {
   grpclog.SetLoggerV2(grpclog.NewLoggerV2(ioutil.Discard, ioutil.Discard, os.Stderr))
}
```

The `NewLoggerV2` method creates a go native logger handler and is only used in grpc.

### PD

PD is similar to TiDB in that it also relies on `logrus` and `pingcap/log`, but with an additional layer of `capnslog` as a proxy. 

Log library dependencies:

![pd-log-dependency](./imgs/pd-log-dependency.png)

#### Logrus

> `logrus`的初始化代码在`pkg/logutil/log.go`：

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The initialization of `logrus` locates at `pkg/logutil/log.go`：
```

```go
// cfg is the config initialized when PD started
// initial logrus logger by cfg
log.SetLevel(StringToLogLevel(cfg.Level))
log.AddHook(&contextHook{})
if cfg.Format == "" {
   cfg.Format = defaultLogFormat
}
log.SetFormatter(StringToLogFormatter(cfg.Format, cfg.DisableTimestamp))
// etcd log
capnslog.SetFormatter(&redirectFormatter{})
// grpc log
lg := &wrapLogrus{log.StandardLogger()}
grpclog.SetLoggerV2(lg)
// raft log
raft.SetLogger(lg)
if len(cfg.File.Filename) == 0 {
   return
}
err = InitFileLog(&cfg.File)
```

The standard logger is then passed down to the etcd (via the `capnslog` proxy), grpc and draft components as the log handler for these packages.

There is only one `logrus` handler inside the entire PD codebase.

Only the etcd, grpc, and draft components use the `logrus` handler.

> #### [pingcap/log (github.com)](https://github.com/pingcap/log)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### [pingcap/log](https://github.com/pingcap/log)
```

```go
// New zap logger
err = cfg.SetupLogger()
if err == nil {
   log.ReplaceGlobals(cfg.GetZapLogger(), cfg.GetZapLogProperties())
} else {
   log.Fatal("initialize logger error", errs.ZapError(err))
}
// Flushing any buffered log entries
defer log.Sync()
```

The logic is simple, create a new handler based on the configuration and replace the global handler at the `pingcap/log` package level.

Most of the logging logic in PD will use the global zap handler.

### [pingcap/br](https://github.com/pingcap/br)

BR is strangely listed here, it is not a necessary component for the tidb cluster to run. It is here just for one reason: tidb depends on BR, which in turn depends on tidb's `util/logutil/log.go`, constituting a circular dependency. 

Not only is it a circular dependency, it also happens to depend on the log component 🙃🙃🙃🙃! This creates a considerable obstacle for the refactor.

The following code is from `pkg/lightning/log/log.go`, which calls TiDB's `InitLogger` and then `pingcap/log`'s InitLogger.

```go
// InitLogger initializes Lightning's and also the TiDB library's loggers.
func InitLogger(cfg *Config, tidbLoglevel string) error {

>    // logutil就是tidb的util/logutil/log.go

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   // import logutil "github.com/tidb/util/logutil/log.go"
```

   logutil.InitLogger(&logutil.LogConfig{Config: pclog.Config{Level: tidbLoglevel}})

   logCfg := &pclog.Config{
      Level: cfg.Level,
   }
   if len(cfg.File) > 0 {
      logCfg.File = pclog.FileLogConfig{
         Filename:   cfg.File,
         MaxSize:    cfg.FileMaxSize,
         MaxDays:    cfg.FileMaxDays,
         MaxBackups: cfg.FileMaxBackups,
      }
   }
   // pclog is based on pingcap/log
   logger, props, err := pclog.InitLogger(logCfg)

// The rest is omitted.
```

BR also relies on TiDB's slow log, which he initializes in the main function as `SlowQueryLogger`.

BR also calls TiDB's `InitLogger` twice in two places.

BR also created two different zap handlers in two places, one of which is not used.

These problem codes are not listed here.

To refactor TiDB's logging functionality, you must first change BR to remove the dependency on TiDB log, then let TiDB depend on the new version of BR, and finally refactor TiDB's logging.

## What to do?

There must be something wrong with the engineering of these codes above, and they must be changed, but the cost of changing them is not small.

> Principle: For long-term consideration, you can't 💩 on 💩. The speed of output can be sacrificed in time if necessary.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Rationale - for long-term consideration, we should maintain code quality. The speed of output can be sacrificed in time if necessary.
```

> To do these things:
> 
> 1. Change the TiDB first, being dependent on the place to write dummy code.
> 2. Modify the BR log to remove the dependency on TiDB `loguitl`.
> 3. Modify PD and TiDB again to unify the log library to `pingcap/log`.
> 4. BR, PD, TiDB all depend directly on `pingcap/log` and do not depend on any other log libraries (including `std/log`).
> 5. BR, PD, and TiDB all encapsulate separate log layers on top of `pingcap/log` and do not rely on each other's log layers, preferring to add some boilerplate code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Implementation plan:

1. Unify log library for `pingcap/tidb` first. For dependent parts we write dummy code to satisfy.
2. Unify log library for `pingcap/br`, remove the dependency on `pingcap/tidb/util/logutil`, and clear dummy code of `pingcap/tidb`.
3. Unify log library for `tikv/pd`.

After the implementation, we have `pingcap/tidb`, `pingcap/br`, `tikv/pd` all depend directly on `pingcap/log` and do not depend on any other log libraries (including `std/log`) or each other.
```

Rationale - for long-term consideration, we should maintain code quality. The speed of output can be sacrificed in time if necessary.

Implementation plan:

> 1. Unify log library for `pingcap/tidb` first. For dependent parts we write dummy code to satisfy.

Reviewer: Will dummy code cause incorrect logics?

Reviewer: I suspect codes related to logs will not have any tests, as they are very hard to be tested automatically in nature.

Reviewer 5: @breeswish I think it is somehow a case link UI changes, that the developer verify locally and attach the output of log to show that after the change it looks good, while the reviewer can reproduce also.

By the way, we can call for an early testing effort for the log behavior among our developers to run their local tests in nightly master and thus we get potential regression converged.
